SOURCE_URL: https://www.heidelberg.de/site/Heidelberg2021/get/documents_E2143551235/heidelberg/Objektdatenbank/15/PDF/15_pdf_Neubuerger_Brosch_engl.pdf
MATCHED_TOPICS: [0, 1, 2, 3, 4]
MATCHED_KEYWORDS: ['altstadt', 'auto', 'bahnstadt', 'engagement', 'international', 'kind', 'kultur', 'landschaft', 'natur', 'neckar', 'ort', 'park', 'person', 'platz', 'regional', 'schule', 'wald']

Heidelberg –
your new home
www.heidelberg.de
Vouchers for 
museum and 
public library 
included 

“I lost my heart 
in Heidelberg.”
Name of a 1927 musical by  
Fred Raymond (music)  
and Fritz Löhner-Beda  
and Ernst Neubach (words)


Welcome to Heidelberg!
Dear new citizen,
I am pleased that you have chosen our city as your new home. Heidelberg is 
known for its scenic beauty, its internationality and diversity. 
Living in Heidelberg means having a home: the city derives its high quality of life 
from the attractive mix of living and working, research and culture. As a 
cosmopolitan city and “Rainbow City”, Heidelberg welcomes all people with open 
arms, regardless of their origin or sexual identity. 
We want you to feel at home here – and to that end, we support you in all areas 
of life: Families with children have access to an excellent childcare network. 
Schoolchildren can develop their talents to the full here, because Heidelberg is 
the best school location in Germany according to several studies. Low-income 
families receive targeted support in the form of a wide range of free services, 
and we also support trainees and students on their way, for example by subsidizing 
local public transport tickets and with the training house. 
Eleven senior citizen centers are available as contact points for all older citizens. 
A wide range of cultural, leisure and sporting activities, from theaters and half-
marathons to festivals with top reputations, leaves nothing to be desired. 
Climate protection plays a central role in Heidelberg: for example, we promote 
the purchase of photovoltaic systems and electric cars, support climate-friendly 
renovations and are proud of our forests and green spaces.
We are also proud of our many scientific and research institutions that take their 
ideas and solutions for a better future from Heidelberg to the world. First and 
foremost is Ruperto Carola, our university of excellence, which attracts many 
young people to study in our city every year thanks to its international appeal.
We wish you a good start in our beautiful city and are happy to answer any 
questions you may have.
Your
Prof. Dr. Eckart Würzner
Mayor 

Content
A good place to live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8
First things first  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .12
Heidelberg in figures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
Unique 15 times over . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
International city of culture  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
Top marks for school and childcare  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .24
Leading the way in climate protection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30
Transport for everyone  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34
World-class research  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36
A safe city  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38
Homes for everyone  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .40
Embracing diversity  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44
Volunteers – a vital asset for Heidelberg  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .46
Getting the public involved  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47
Partners around the world  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .48
Imprint . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .51


A good place to live  | 98 | A good place to live
A good place to live
Heidelberg is considered one of the most beautiful 
cities in Germany. Every year, around 12 million 
people visit the world-famous city alongside the 
river Neckar, to see the interplay between the castle, 
the old town and the river amid the hills of the 
Odenwald.
The about 160,000 citizens of Heidelberg appreciate 
Heidelberg‘s high quality of life. Year after year, 
almost all respondents in the Heidelberg survey 
state that they love living in their city. This is hardly 
surprising, given the city’s many strengths.

A good place to live  | 1110 | A good place to live
Family-friendly 
 
Heidelberg supports families with offers 
that are among the best in Germany: 
exemplary childcare, a choice of out -
standing schools and holiday programs, 
fun playgrounds, child-friendly traffic 
planning and much more.
City of science
 
Heidelberg University is one of the best 
in the world. Together with the Uni -
versity Hospital, respected research 
institutes like the German Cancer Re -
search Center, numerous research-  
related companies, and other higher 
education establishments, it has earned 
Heidelberg a worldwide reputation as 
a major center for science.
Cosmopolitan
 
An estimated 56,000 people with a 
migration background are at home in 
Heidelberg. They come from around 
180 countries and enrich the vibrant 
community.
Good for recreation 
 
Because of its scenic location, its fa -
vorable climatic conditions and its urban 
flair Heidelberg has one of the highest 
leisure values in Germany.
Strong for business
The city provides jobs for around 
120,000 people. Of these, around two-
thirds are employed in the knowledge- 
intensive sector.
Dynamic urban 
development
 
Housing is a top priority in Heidelberg. 
The Bahnstadt is currently being devel-
oped as a pioneering new district. It 
will provide living space for around 
6,800 people and up to 6,000 jobs.
On four former sites of the US Army, 
future quarters are growing with sev -
eral thousand apartments, space for 
innovative companies and high-quality 
sports, cultural and leisure facilities.
Cultural mecca
 
Heidelberg impresses with its wide 
range of cultural offerings in the areas 
of music, theater, dance, visual arts and 
film. Heidelberg is also the first and so 
far only German-speaking city of liter -
ature in the UNESCO network of “Cre -
ative Cities“.
Voluntary work
 
Heidelberg has a diverse and well-  
structured range of volunteers. Their 
commitment is invaluable for success -
ful coexistence and social cohesion.
Involving people
 
Heidelberg‘s citizens are systematically 
involved into municipal planning at an 
early stage. They are thus important 
sources of ideas for the administration 
and the city council. The city‘s project 
list, which provides information on 
planned projects, also enables early 
participation.
A safe city
 
Heidelberg is safe – thanks to a part -
nership with the state police and a 
broad-based municipal public order 
service.
Eco-friendly
Heidelberg is an international pioneer 
in climate protection. As early as 2015, 
the United Nations named the city a 
“Global Green City“. With the climate 
protection action plan, adopted in 2019, 
Heidelberg aims to become climate-  
neutral by 2030.

First things first  | 1312 | First things first 
All services of Heidelberg City Administration can be accessed at the adminis -
trative offices, including: registering your new place of residence, applying for 
a passport, ID or parking permit, changing the place of registration of your car, 
applying for a police clearance certificate (Führungszeugnis) or International 
Driving Permit, picking up yellow recycling bags or the latest waste collection 
calendar, applying for a “Heidelberg-Pass“ / “Heidelberg-Pass+“, requesting 
childCare vouchers (Betreuungsgutscheine) or “housing eligibility vouchers“ 
(Wohnberechtigungsscheine), purchasing vouchers for the women’s night 
taxi (Frauen-nachttaxischeine), and much more. The addresses and open -
ing times of the administrative offices can be found at www.heidelberg.de/
administration.
A wide range of citizens’ service information from A for “Abfallkalender“ 
(waste collection calendar) to Z for “Zulassungsformular“ (car registration 
form) is also available 24 hours a day on the internet at www.heidelberg.de/
buergerservice .
Homepage
At www.heidelberg.de  you will find 
a comprehensive range of services 
and information: From an online city 
map to a calendar of events to the 
latest news from the administration 
and the municipal council.
City Gazette
Free of charge for every household: 
On Wednesdays, the Heidelberg City 
Gazette lands in your mailbox.
Social media
  heidelberg.de
  heidelberg_de
  heidelberg_de
  StadtHeidelberg
All posts of the municipal social media 
channels at a glance at 
www.stage.heidelberg.de
MeinHeidelberg-App
The MeinHeidelberg app provides cur-
rent service information and tips. The 
app can be downloaded free of charge 
at www.digitales.heidelberg.de/app.
Important emergency numbers
Police: 
Dial 110 to reach the nearest police 
station.
Fire and rescue services: 
Under the European emergency 
number 112 you can reach the fire de-
partment and the rescue service for 
life- threatening cases of illness.
Citizen Service
The Heidelberg “citizen’s service“ 
(Bürgerservice) team are on hand 
from 8.00 am – 6.00 pm Monday to 
Friday to answer questions about 
the services of the City of Heidelberg 
and other Federal and state authori -
ties. They can be reached on 06221 
58-10580 or 115, the central number 
for information on any German 
public authority. The citizens’ service 
can also connect you to other services 
as necessary.
Citizen service in your local area
Alternatively, you can access citizens’ 
services in person from the various 
“administrative offices“ (Bürgerämter) 
around the city:
 – Bürgeramt Altstadt (Old Town)
 –  Bürgeramt Boxberg/Emmertsgrund
 – Bürgeramt Handschuhsheim
 – Bürgeramt Kirchheim
 – Bürgeramt Mitte  
(“Central“ administrative office,  
covering the districts of Bahnstadt, 
Bergheim, Südstadt and Weststadt)
 – Bürgeramt Neuenheim
 – Bürgeramt Pfaffengrund
 – Bürgeramt Rohrbach
 – Bürgeramt Wieblingen
 –  Bürgeramt Ziegelhausen/ 
Schlierbach
First things first 
The city of Heidelberg offers you information and 
assistance for a quick orientation in your new home.

 12 Mio.  
guests per year
 120.000  
workplaces
Approximately 87 % employed  
in the service sector
65 %   
of employees subject to 
social insurance contribu -
tions work in the knowl -
edge-intensive service 
sector and in industrial 
high technology
38.000  
students 
of which around 29,000 at 
Heidelberg University
Heidelberg4you
More than 200 locations 
are covered by the free 
public WLAN network 
Heidelberg in figures | 1514 | Heidelberg in figures
Heidelberg in figures
160.000  
Inhabitants
Heidelberg is the “youngest“ 
city in Germany. About 39 % of 
the Heidelberg residents are 
younger than 30 years, around 
16 % older than 65.
34 %  
university graduates  
of all employees subject 
to social insurance 
contributions. 
By comparison, the national  
average is 18.5 %.
109 km² 
area
30 % 
populated 
area 
70 % 
green space

16 | Unique 15 times over Unique 15 times over  | 17
Unique 15 
times over
Heidelberg has 15 districts, each 
with its own distinct identity: 
The sheer variety of the city’s districts 
is what makes Heidelberg such an 
attractive and vibrant place to live. 
Residents can make their own mark on 
their local district by joining one of the 
many district associations and other 
groups. 
With the Patrick-Henry-Village  
 Heidelberg‘s 16th district is currently 
under development. It is planned to 
create 5,000 jobs and housing for up 
to 10,000 people.
For further information, please visit 
the section “Living in Heidelberg” at 
www.heidelberg.de . 
The weekly market in front of 
Tiefburg Castle in the Hand -
schuhsheim district is a popular 
weekend meeting place and an 
experience for all the senses 
with the regional produce on 
offer there.
 – Altstadt (Old Town)
 – Bahnstadt
 – Bergheim
 – Boxberg
 – Emmertsgrund
 – Handschuhsheim
 – Kirchheim
 – Neuenheim
 – Pfaffengrund
 – Rohrbach
 – Schlierbach
 – Südstadt
 – Weststadt
 – Wieblingen
 – Ziegelhausen

International city of culture  | 19
International city of culture
If you have been living in Heidelberg for some time 
already, you will know that it lives up to its reputa -
tion. As well as the beautiful surrounding scenery 
of the Odenwald hills, and the lovely river Neckar, 
the city offers a wide range of cultural and leisure 
facilities.    
Heidelberg is a city that knows how to 
continue its great literary tradition in a 
contemporary way. Heidelberg‘s tradi-
tion as the seat of the oldest university 
in Germany with important philoso -
phers, theologians and literary figures, 
is combined with Heidelberg‘s lively 
literary scene and above-average num-
ber of libraries, bookstores, publishers 
and translators, publishing houses and 
translators. For this reason, in December 
2014 it became the first and only Ger -
man city to be included in the world‘s 
largest cultural network, UNESCO‘s 
Creative Cities  Network, as a City  
of Literature: www.heidelberg.de/  
cityofliterature.
With its extensive collections, the 
Kurpfälzisches Museum , founded 
in 1879, offers an astounding impres -
sion of the former Electoral Palatinate 
and its capital Heidelberg. Learn more 
about the exhibitions and collections 
at www.museum-heidelberg.de.  As a 
new citizen, you can use the enclosed 
family voucher on your first visit to 
the Kurpfälzische Museum. You can 
redeem the enclosed family voucher 
for two adults and two children (see 
page 49).
The Mark Twain Center for Transatlantic 
Relations in Südstadt is a cultural center 
and place of exchange on the history 
and future issues of German-American 
relations. At a historically significant 
location in the former commandant‘s of-
fice, where the heart of the U.S. Army‘s 
headquarters in Europe beat, a multi -
media exhibition is on display where 
visitors can discover various facets 
of German-American coexistence in 
Heidelberg with the help of digital 
aids and in a playful way. 
For more information, visit www.mark-
twain-center.com.
Culture and leisure
Music, film, theater, dance, literature 
and art of all eras and styles, enter -
tainment and celebrations, sports and 
recreation – Heidelberg offers a wide 
range of leisure activities.
The Theater und OrchesterHeidel-  
berg i s  a  fi v e - d i v i s i o n  t h e a t e r  w i t h   
opera, concert, drama and dance, as 
well as its own ensemble for children‘s 
and youth theater, whose capacity uti -
lization is among the best in Germany. 
The theater‘s various festivals, such 
as the Heidelberger Stückemarkt, the 
Dance Biennale and the Heidelberg  
Castle Festival contribute to this. You 
can find out more about the theater 
program at www.theater.heidelberg.de.
18 | International city of culture
Old masters and modern artists: the Kurpfälzische 
Museum offers an exciting variety. 

An overview of shopping opportu -
nities in Heidelberg is provided by 
the online platform www.vielmehr.
heidelberg.de . There you will also find 
information on the citywide “Danke -
Schein“ voucher.
If you want to stay up to date and well 
entertained, the municipal library is 
at your disposal with a wide range of 
literature and media. With the library 
card, you can borrow a comprehen -
sive selection of books, magazines, 
CDs, DVDs and electronic media. As 
a new citizen, you will receive the card 
free of charge for three months upon 
presentation of the enclosed voucher 
(see page 45): www.heidelberg.de/
stadtbuecherei . 
Would you like to enjoy nature in your 
free time, learn something or visit 
famous sights?
There are numerous opportunities for 
all of these. Among the special attrac -
tions are the world-famous castle  
and the funicular to the Königstuhl. 
In the Heidelberg Zoo  – the largest 
zoo in the Metropolitan Region – you 
can discover more than about 2,700 
animals from all over the world. Face 
to face with a tiger or lion, discover a 
red panda high up in the branches, 
watch elephant bulls bathing – all this 
Friends of contemporary art can ex -
pect contemporary works in the hall 
of the Kunstverein  directly next to 
the Kurpfälzische Museum. For more 
information, visit www.hdkv.de .
With the Prinzhorn Collection and the 
Hassbecker Collection , Heidelberg 
has two internationally outstanding 
collections of works of outsider art with 
a focus on “Art and Madness“ and  
“Naive Painting” established through 
the work of the two Heidelberg  
museums Sammlung Prinzhorn and 
Haus Cajeth. 
Art and culture dealing with the les -
bian, gay, bisexual, trans*, inter and 
queer (lsbtiq+ for short) community 
is offered annually by the Heidelberg 
Queer Festival. When it was founded 
in 2009, it was the first festival for queer 
culture. Today it is the largest and most 
renowned of its kind in Germany and 
one of the flagships of the “Rainbow 
City“ Heidelberg.
Heidelberg also has a large number of in-
dependent institutions such as Halle02, 
Kulturfenster, Deutsch-Amer -
ikanisches Institut, Interkul -
turelles Zentrum, Unterwegs-  
Theater and Kulturhaus Karlstor -
bahnhof. A list of all cultural institu -
tions, sports facilities and other leisure 
activities can be found under Life > 
Leisure at www.heidelberg.de . 
The many festivals also have a special 
appeal, including the classical music 
festivals “Heidelberger Früh -
ling“ and “Enjoy Jazz“ or the 
renowned “International Film 
Festival Heidelberg-Mann -
heim“.
“Metropolink“  is also an inte -
gral part of the Heidelberg Sum -
mer. For years, this nationally 
renowned festival of urban art 
has been actively contributing to 
the city‘s development and gives 
Heidelberg a modern face.
With “Metropolink‘s Commis-
sary“ – Germany‘s largest indoor 
gallery for street art – there is 
now also a year-round venue for 
urban art, culture, exchange and 
encounters.
At the municipal music and sing-
ing school, around 4,400 students re -
ceive instruction in singing, orchestra, 
choir, band and theory: 
www.musikschule.heidelberg.de .
Shopping Location Heidelberg
Heidelberg is one of the most attrac -
tive shopping cities in Germany. There 
are more than 500 retail stores and 
cafés in the city center – from the old 
town to Bergheim and Neuenheim. 
The approximately 1.4-kilometer-long 
Hauptstrasse alone is home to more 
than 250 stores and restaurants.
The variety of small owner-operated 
stores, the many side streets and the 
high quality of stay create a special 
shopping experience in the Old Town. 
20 | International city of culture
The former US area Patrick-Henry-Village is the perfect setting for the popular Metropolink festival. 
International city of culture  | 21

International city of culture | 23
field, for beach volleyball courts, a 
large children‘s playground as well as 
a skate facility, and there are oppor -
tunities for the trend sport slackline. 
Recreation and relaxation can be found 
in any season in one of Heidelberg‘s 
five swimming pools , the more than 
120 sports clubs and over 70 sports 
facilities and halls, as well as the  “alla 
hopp!” facility  in Kirchheim.
In the Heidelberg Innovation Park 
(hip) on Speyerer Straße, the new 
SNP dome  provides additional space 
for club and school sports. The MLP 
Academics Heidelberg basketball team 
and the Rhein-Neckar Löwen handball 
team also play there. Major sporting 
events such as the HeidelbergMan 
triathlon, the SAS half-marathon, 
international rugby tournaments, 
the rowing regatta and the Dragon 
Boat Cup attract recreational and pro-
fessional athletes and many spectators. 
Other events, such as the Family Sports 
Day, round off the program.
The “Explo Heidelberg” on the grounds 
of the zoo offers fascinating scientific 
experiments to participate in. The 
House of Astronomy  on the König -
stuhl attracts children and adults alike 
to research into stars, galaxies, planets 
and black holes.
and more is possible. Around 500,000 
visitors a year also experience seals, 
monkeys and exotic birds. The Zoo 
School offers year-round events for 
children, teens and adults, such as 
zoo lessons, zoo vacations and tours 
with a zoo ranger. More info at www.
zoo-heidelberg.de . Tours and chil -
dren‘s birthday parties can be booked 
at www.zooschule-heidelberg.de .
In the city forest , there are 250 kilo -
meters of hiking trails, numerous rest 
and lookout points, themed and ad -
venture trails, the Königstuhl walk -
ing course, designated mountain bike 
trails, the arboretums, the “Pferchel“ 
forest adventure area for children 
and much more to discover. The city 
forest is outstandingly sustainable: 
Heidelberg has had the globally rec -
ognized PEFC seal of approval for its 
forest management since 2001. In 
2015, Heidelberg was the first city in 
Germany to receive the “Recreational 
Forest“ certificate for the high rec -
reational quality of its entire forest 
in accordance with PEFC standards. 
In 2018, Heidelberg was allowed to 
call itself “PEFC Forest Capital.“ This 
was followed in 2021 by the PEFC 
designation “Spa and Healing Forest“ 
– likewise as the first German city. The 
environmental education program 
“Natürlich Heidelberg”  lets visitors 
experience nature and the forests 
around the city in a new way.
From March to December, guided tours, 
excursions and hands-on activities for 
children, young people and adults take 
place. The offers, including barbecue 
huts, can be booked directly at www.
natuerlich.heidelberg.de .
The riverbank at the Neckar  is also 
particularly popular as a play, sports, 
sunbathing and recreational area. In 
addition, a part is used as a soccer 
22 | International city of culture
The river banks at the Neckar are a popular spot to meet and relax. 
Get out of the daily grind and into the fun. In Heidelberg, you can swim in five swimming pools. Whether 
it‘s a sports pool in the middle of the city, an outdoor pool with a wide-wave slide, or an indoor pool with 
a sauna – everyone will find their personal favorite pool here.

Top marks for school and childcare  | 2524 | Top marks for school and childcare  
Top marks for school  
and childcare 
Heidelberg is an extremely family-friendly city. It 
offers the best childcare for very young children of 
any city in the state of Baden-Württemberg, and its 
schools are outstanding.
Education
Education has a long tradition in Heidel- 
berg, which is lived and further devel-
oped. The spectrum extends far be -
yond the excellent range of courses 
offered by the university and colleges. 
It includes services for all generations. 
The city claims the top position na -
tionwide in early childhood education 
and is a nationwide pioneer in school-
based learning. For more information, 
visit www.heidelberg.de/bildung .
Heidelberg aims to give all its stu -
dents the best school-leaving qual -
ification possible. For example, ad -
ditional systematically structured 
language support is provided at all 
Heidelberg elementary schools and 
the Marie-Marcks School.
The Heidelberg School Support 
System (HÜS) provides support for 
lower-achieving students, while the 
Hector Children‘s Academy and the 
Hector Seminar are aimed at the 
highly gifted. 
Of course, this also includes students 
with disabilities. Heidelberg has devel-
oped viable support systems when it 
comes to inclusion.

Top marks for school and childcare  | 27
e. V., which unites more than 50 youth 
associations, supports their concerns.
With the “Feierbad” , the city has cre-
ated another flexible offer for young 
people in Heidelberg. On an event area 
in the Tiergartenbad, young people can 
celebrate together with free admission.
Social
All people in Heidelberg should be 
able to live independently and in a self- 
determined manner. For this reason, 
the city offers a wide range of programs 
that give citizens on low incomes the 
chance to participate in social life.
For example, the Heidelberg Pass and 
the Heidelberg Pass+ provide free or 
reduced-price admission to numerous 
cultural, sporting or other activities and 
free childcare in daycare centers from 
birth to school entry. Both variants of 
the Heidelberg Pass can be applied 
for at the citizens‘ registration offices.
A social ticket  is also available for 
Heidelberg Pass holders. This subsi -
dized season ticket allows citizens to use 
buses and trains at low prices. This is 
available at the RNV customer center at 
the central station, and further informa-
tion is available at www.rnv-online.de.
The city supports its citizens direct -
ly with subsidy programs for rented 
apartments and property and makes 
a contribution to affordable hous -
ing. More at www.heidelberg.de/  
foerderprogramm
Numerous advice centers in Heidelberg 
offer help in all situations.
www.heidelberg.de/beratung
Senior citizens
Heidelberg is a city in which it is easy 
to grow old. The pages at www. 
heidelberg.de/senioren  provide an 
overview of the wide range of informa-
tion, advice and services on offer and 
the many ways of becoming and stay -
ing active. In eleven Heidelberg dis -
tricts, senior centers  are a central 
point of contact for elderly people. 
They offer a leisure program that 
Family
Heidelberg offers a wide range of op -
tions for balancing family and career: 
 – Even for the youngest children 
from the age of one, there are flexi -
ble opening hours, even all day, and 
excellently qualified specialist staff  
in the daycare centers.
 – Elementary schools offer lunch, 
homework, afternoon and vacation 
care.
 – The secondary school has the right 
profile for the next generation and 
is easy to reach. Every educational 
qualification can be obtained at ei -
ther an all-day or a half-day school.
Heidelberg is a statewide pioneer in 
early childhood care and quality  
assurance. 80 percent of elementary 
school children take advantage of the 
extensive after-school care options.
There are children‘s and youth centers 
in Heidelberg in practically every district 
and run by all providers. The municipal 
“Haus der Jugend”  (House of Youth) 
in Römerstraße offers a cross-district 
service. There is plenty of room here 
for sports, art, dance and music, both 
during school hours and holiday time. 
For more information, visit www.haus -
derjugend-hd.de . The youth associa -
tions of the two large churches, for 
example, organize camps, events and 
open meetings. The Stadtjugendring 
26 | Top marks for school and childcare  
Place to be: the strongly fre -
quented skate park is located 
right next to the riverside.   

Top marks for school and childcare  | 2928 | Top marks for school and childcare
ranges from memory training to hikes 
and lunches. The city places a lot of 
emphasis on promoting the health of 
its older citizens and designs individual 
exercise programs with many partners.
With the Academy for the Elderly , 
Heidelberg also has a renowned inde -
pendent educational institution for 
people over 60 that offers courses 
ranging from astronomy to learning 
Chinese to creative writing. For more 
information, visit www.akademie-fuer-
 aeltere.de.
The city of Heidelberg aims to enable 
older people to live independently in 
their own homes for as long as possi -
ble. For example, numerous outpa -
tient social services offer house -
keeping or nursing services. The 
Heidelberg Care Support Point  
provides advice and arranges outpa -
tient services (phone 06221 58-49000, 
pflegestuetzpunkt@heidelberg.de). 
Information is also available at www.
heidelberg.de/pflege. Structural chang-
es can also help people stay at home.
Information on financing conversions, 
for example with the help of the city‘s 
“Barrier-free Lifetime Homes“ subsidy 
program, is available from the City of 
Heidelberg‘s housing counseling ser -
vice (phone 06221 58-25300, wohn -
beratung@heidelberg.de). 
Those in need of care and their rela -
tives can use a traffic light system at 
www.heidelberg.de/pflegeplatz , 
showing whether or which nursing 
homes in Heidelberg currently have 
places available. A contact form ena -
bles initial contact with the relevant 
facilities.
The city‘s projects aim to empower older people, enable seniors to 
live as full and independent a life as possible in old age, and prevent 
loneliness.

Leading the way in climate protection  | 3130 | Leading the way in climate protection 
Heidelberg is committed to lasting environmental, 
nature, and climate protection and plays a pioneering 
role in this area internationally. The framework for 
this is provided by the 30-point Climate Protection 
Action Plan, which covers all areas of life.
Leading the way in 
climate protection 
Climate Protection Action Plan
Heidelberg has a pioneering role in 
environmental and climate protection, 
which the city intends to expand fur -
ther. The goal: Heidelberg wants to 
be climate-neutral by 2050 at the lat -
est. This means that the city wants to 
reduce CO2 emissions by 95 percent 
and cut the municipality‘s energy re -
quirements by half. On the way to 
achieving this, Heidelberg launched a 
major climate protection action plan 
in November 2019 with the first 30 
concrete proposals.
This action plan sets out targets and 
priorities within the “Master Plan 
100 % Climate Protection“  (www.
heidelberg.de/masterplan100).
The proposals affect all areas of life,  
from construction and housing, nu -
trition and consumption to nature-  
oriented urban design and mobility 
(#hd4climate).
The city can and wants to achieve 
these changes only together with its 
citizens and with stakeholders from 
business and society. All new citizens 
are cordially invited to use their move 
here as a starting signal for (more) 
commitment to climate protection.
Energy consulting and funding 
programs
Interested parties can easily deter -
mine their personal CO2 footprint 
using the Heidelberg CO2 Mirror at 
www.heidelberg.de/co2spiegel . Here 
you can find individual suggestions on 
how to save carbon dioxide.
The subsidy program for the rational use 
of energy promotes thermal insulation of 
the house and ventilation with heat re-
covery. There are also support programs 
for sustainable water management and 
environmentally friendly vehicles. Infor-
mation is available at www.heidelberg.
de/foerderprogramm.
The city‘s free energy advice hotline 
provides citizens with expert advice 
on all aspects of energy conservation 
and climate protection: 06221 58-18141 
and klimasuchtschutz@heidelberg.
de. It is supported by the Heidelberg-  
Rhein-Neckar-Kreis gGmbH climate 
protection and energy consulting 
agency. For further information, visit 
www.kliba-heidelberg.de.
Anyone interested in generating electric-
ity from solar energy on their own roof 
can get free personal advice – whether 
as an owner, landlord, tenant or compa-
ny (information on the solar campaign 
at www.heidelberg.de/sonnenstrom).
The installation of photovoltaic systems 
on roofs and facades is also being pro-
moted to encourage private individu -
als, housing associations, businesses 
and farmers to exploit the solar power 
potential in Heidelberg. For more in -
formation, visit www.heidelberg.de/
foerderprogramm.

Leading the way in climate protection  | 33
Nature and landscape
When it comes to preserving biodiver -
sity, ecological aspects play the leading 
role in Heidelberg. For example, as part 
of the species protection plan, mainte-
nance measures are carried out in eco-
logically valuable areas of the district 
to preserve the habitat of rare animal 
and plant species. In addition, with 
the help of the program for biotope 
networking, connecting structures in 
the form of meadows are created in 
agriculturally used areas. Animals can 
use these as migration corridors. More 
information on these and other con -
servation activities is available at www.
heidelberg.de/naturundlandschaft .
Sustainable consumption
With projects relating to the topic of 
“sustainable consumption“, the City 
of Heidelberg would like to encour -
age citizens to become aware of their 
responsibility as consumers and to 
contribute to sustainable development 
in their everyday purchasing decisions. 
Among other things, Heidelberg has 
been designated a Fair Trade Town. 
Since 2021, on the initiative of the city, 
producers of regional food from Hei -
delberg and the region have been 
advertising their products with the new 
“Genial regional”  label. In addition 
to its commitment to fair trade and 
regional products, the city also wants 
to promote the use of organic foods. 
As part of the “Bio in Heidelberg“  
campaign, various projects are being 
implemented to this end together with 
educational institutions as well as fa -
cilities along the value chain – from 
farmers to retailers to restaurants. 
Two shopping guides with tips on sus -
tainable purchasing and consump -
tion alternatives are available at www. 
heidelberg.de/bio .
Passive house construction: Bahn -
stadt
With Bahnstadt, Heidelberg has 
launched an outstanding climate pro -
tection project that serves as a global 
role model. Passive house construction 
is the standard for the entire district - so 
far, this is unique in Germany. Heidel -
berg aims to become a climate-neutral 
city by 2050 at the latest. www.heidel-
berg-bahnstadt.de
Sustainable energy
With its 2020/2030 energy concept, 
Stadtwerke Heidelberg is expanding 
a climate-friendly energy supply. The 
wood-fired combined heat and power 
plant, which supplies the Bahnstadt 
district with heat and electricity, was a 
first building block. Further plants and 
an energy and future storage facility are 
being built in the Pfaffengrund energy 
park. www.swhd.de/energiekonzeption
Education for sustainable devel -
opment
The Education for Sustainable Develop -
ment program teaches children about 
the impact of their own actions on 
the future. Numerous projects ensure 
that ESD topics are integrated into 
everyday school life: In the “E-Team 
Project” , for example, students work 
to protect the climate. Mobility projects 
motivate children to travel in a healthy 
and environmentally friendly way. At 
the popular “Natürlich Heidelberg”  
series of events, children and adults 
learn how important nature conser -
vation and environmental protection 
are. Information is available at www.
heidelberg.de/bne .
32 | Leading the way in climate protection
The Bahnstadt district is characterized by passive house construction and is an international lighthouse 
project.
Little people, big impact: It is never too early to 
be a climate activist. 

Transport for everyone  | 35
34 | Transport for everyone
Transport for everyone
Environmentally conscious mobility is important 
to the city. Heidelberg is therefore promoting 
the expansion of local public transport and the 
cycling network.
With the Heidelberg Mobility Network , the street-
car network is being comprehensively expanded, 
including the reconstruction of the central station  
stop and the new streetcar to Bahnstadt.
 
Since January 2019, Heidelberg has been the first 
municipality in the region to use electric buses in the 
city center.
Local public transport
Just under a third of all Heidelberg 
residents primarily use public trans -
portation. With the Heidelberg Mobility 
Network, the streetcar network has 
been extensively expanded in recent 
years, including the construction of a 
new streetcar route through Bahnstadt 
and the modernization of the central 
station stop. For more information, visit 
www.heidelberg-mobinetz.de.
For public transport timetable informa-
tion, visit www.vrn.de. Since 2016, the 
city of Heidelberg has been promoting 
the switch from car to public transport 
with an annual ticket for local public 
transport for citizens who voluntarily 
deregister their vehicle.
Cycle paths
33 percent of Heidelberg residents reg-
ularly use bicycles in the city center. 
Awarded the title of “Bicycle-Friendly 
Municipality” by the state, Heidelberg 
is a model municipality for the Rad -
KULTUR initiative of the Baden-Würt -
temberg Ministry of Transport and In -
frastructure. The city wants to further 
increase its attractiveness for cyclists 
and launched the bike offensive – a 
whole bundle of measures to improve 
cycling www.heidelberg.de/fahrrad -
freundlich.
Good connections to highways and 
air traffic
Even distant destinations can be 
reached quickly and easily: By car, 
you can be on the Autobahn 5 in 
just a few minutes. Within just 50 
minutes, you can reach Frankfurt 
Airport and Stuttgart in 90 minutes. 
With the long-distance train service, 
the journey is even faster. In addition, 
long-distance buses serve numerous 
destinations throughout Germany.

World-class research  | 37
World-class research
Heidelberg is one of the most important centers of 
science worldwide. 
Heidelberg is one of the world‘s top 
locations for up-and-coming industries 
such as biotechnology and organic elec-
tronics. Excellent cutting-edge research 
clusters and renowned research insti -
tutes such as the European Laboratory 
for Molecular Biology (EMBL),  the Ger-
man Cancer Research Center (DKFZ) 
and three Max Planck Institutes 
contribute to Heidelberg‘s outstanding 
worldwide reputation as science hub.
As Heidelberg Mannheim Health & 
Life Science Alliance, the two medical 
faculties and university hospitals as well 
as the renowned research institutions 
in the region form a unique alliance 
in Germany. The goal: to make the 
Rhine-Neckar region an international 
center of excellence in life sciences, 
medical technology and health care 
industry. This should also raise the 
already first-class patient care onto a 
new level.
Since 1901, 57 personalities whose lives 
are connected to Heidelberg, have re -
ceived the Nobel Prize. The most recent 
one, the Nobel Prize of Chemistry, was 
awarded to Professor Dr. Stefan W. Hell 
for his development of super-resolution 
microscopy. 
34 percent of all those who work and 
pay statutory social security contribu -
tions in the city hold a degree.
Both Heidelberg and the Rhine-Neckar 
metropolitan region are characterized 
by close cooperation between science 
and business. This is reflected in a large 
number of interdisciplinary research 
centers such as the Heidelberg Tech -
nology Park, the “Industry on Campus“ 
projects between Heidelberg University 
and different companies or in the office 
and laboratory buildings SkyLabs and 
SkyAngle in the new Bahnstadt district. 
The exceptional role of science in Hei -
delberg also benefits other aspects 
of Heidelberg life: enabling daycare 
centers and schools to offer special ac-
tivities, creating exciting local jobs and 
profiting those working in the creative 
industries. The city wants to leverage 
this effect further: The International 
Building Exhibition Heidelberg (IBA) 
is dedicated to building and exploring 
the knowledge city of the future with 
its motto “Knowledge | creates | City“.
With the new “Heidelberg Congress 
Center” in the Bahnstadt district, con-
gresses in science and business will 
find a new home. This will enable the 
“Stadthalle” in the old town to concen-
trate on its strengths as a concert and 
cultural center again. The “Stadthalle” 
is currently undergoing extensive ren -
ovation.
Founded in 1386, the University of 
Heidelberg is the oldest university in 
Germany. Its leading role in the academic 
scene in Germany and abroad is reflect-
ed in its classification and promotion 
by central and state government as an 
“university of excellence”. According to the 
Shanghai ranking, Ruperto Carola is reg-
ularly the best-ranked German university 
and counts among the world’s Top 50. 
38,000 students take advantage of the 
courses offered by the various universi-
ties, cooperative education institutes and 
other higher-education establishments in 
Heidelberg – including the Heidelberg 
University of Education (PH Heidel-
berg), the private SRH University and 
the University of Jewish Studies.
36 | World-class research
The European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), one of the world‘s best-known biological research 
laboratories, has its headquarters in Heidelberg.

A safe city
Fighting fires, saving lives, ensuring traffic safety, 
settling disputes – there are many aspects to making 
sure that Heidelberg is a safe place to be around.
Youth fire brigade and volunteer 
fire department
In addition to the professional fire 
department with its more than 116 
full-time firefighters, more than 400 
citizens of the city of Heidelberg are 
involved on a voluntary basis in eight 
departments of the volunteer fire 
department. The children‘s and youth 
fire brigade has around 220 members, 
around a third of whom are girls. In 
addition to firefighting lessons, they 
meet for joint activities.
Working together
For a safe Heidelberg and for an op -
timal response when disaster strikes, 
the city administration, police and res -
cue services work closely together. 
The “municipal public order service” 
(Kommunaler Ordnungsdienst), for 
example, makes sure that bars and 
shops in the old town close on time and 
responds to disturbances of the peace. 
The “municipal enforcement service” 
(Gemeindevollzugsdienst) monitors 
parking and adherence to the rules of 
the road. To protect against flooding, 
the city’s civil engineering office works 
not only with the fire department and 
the municipal public order service but 
also with the relief organiziation DLRG 
as well as the civil protection organ -
ization Technisches Hilfswerk and, if 
necessary, the Red Cross, the Malteser 
emergency service and the Army.
Coping with disasters
Tips are available in the “Disasters 
Alarm” guidebook, which is available 
free of charge and can be download -
ed from www.bbk.bund.de . Official 
warnings can be received directly on 
your smartphone via the warning app 
NINA. The app also provides warnings 
of severe weather or flood situations as 
well as advice on the correct reaction 
to such weather events. It is available 
free of charge for Android and iOS.
Always think about the people around 
you: Inform them in case of an emer -
gency situation and support them if 
they need help.
The Heidelberg Fire Department
Around the clock, the men and women 
of the Heidelberg Fire Department are 
on duty 24 hours a day to provide quick 
and effective help in emergencies. They 
are called out 2,500 times a year to fight 
fires, rescue citizens from road accidents 
and, increasingly, help people affected 
by extreme weather situations. On aver-
age, they save between 20 to 25 people 
a year out of life-threatening situations.
Doing this job properly requires inten-
sive training, including annual training 
sessions in the fire station’s special gas-
mask training facility, as well as state-
of-the-art equipment. Three turntable 
ladders help rescue people from higher 
floors.
In the districts of Pfaffengrund, Wieblin-
gen and Ziegelhausen, new fire stations 
have been built. In October 2020, the 
new integrated control room started 
operations, coordination all calls to the 
emergency number 112 in Heidelberg 
and the Rhein-Neckar-region.
It is the operations center for non-police 
emergency response for Heidelberg and 
the Rhine-Neckar district.
38 | A safe city
More than 600 members of the DLRG Heidelberg are committed to 
improving safety on and along the Neckar River.
A safe city  | 39

Homes for everyone  | 41
Fighting discrimination
It is important to the City of Heidelberg 
that all of its residents live together 
harmoniously. The  Office  for  Equal  
Opportunity  is the point of contact 
for anyone who wants to take action 
against discrimination or who has ex -
perienced it themselves – whether on 
basis of their place of origin, a disa -
bility, age, sexual identity or gender. 
Further information as well as advice 
and support are available by calling 
06221 58-15550, by e-mailing antidiskri-
minierung@heidelberg.de and looking 
online at www.heidelberg.de/antidis -
crimination.
Help in cases of domestic violence
The Heidelberg Intervention Model 
against violence in relationships 
(HIM) supports those affected by 
domestic violence to escape the cycle of 
violence. Women and children can turn 
to the Women‘s Intervention Center 
for help and counseling. The Men‘s 
Intervention Center and the men‘s 
hotline offer counseling and therapy 
for perpetrators of violence as well as 
support and counseling for men who 
have experienced violence themselves. 
Further information is available at www.
heidelberg.de/him .
40 | A safe city
Homes for everyone
Since 2012, just under 3,900 new apartments have 
been built in Heidelberg. This has been made pos -
sible by the construction of new neighborhoods 
such as Bahnstadt as well as the reuse of former US  
military sites.
Dynamic growth
Heidelberg is a popular place to live 
and work. However, this popularity 
puts a strain on the housing market. To 
create sufficient living space for people 
of all income groups, the city council 
unanimously adopted the Housing 
action program. An annual 800 new 
apartments are to be built in the com -
ing years. In addition, the city runs 
two subsidy schemes for tenants and 
buyers and builds special family-friend -
ly apartments in the new district of 
Bahnstadt. Moreover, the development 
of affordable housing on the former US 
military sites is a top priority.
Bahnstadt is particularly popular with families and is Heidelberg‘s district with the most children.

housing. The first residents moved here 
in the summer of 2016. The plans for 
former US hospital also consist mainly 
of residential buildings. On the site of 
Patton Barracks, the Heidelberg In -
novation Park is being developed and 
Patrick-Henry-Village is to become a 
model city district of the future for up 
to 15,000 people. For further informa -
tion, visit www.heidelberg.de/english/
home/develop/conversion.
IBA Heidelberg:  
“Knowledge | creates | city”
The Heidelberg International Building 
Exhibition (IBA) “Knowledge | Creates | 
City” illuminates urban planning in the 
knowledge city of the future over a 
period of ten years until 2022.
The IBA covers locations throughout 
the whole city and many areas of life. 
One of the projects, which involves a 
substantial public consultation element, 
is the development of a concept for 
the further use of Heidelberg‘s largest 
conversion area Patrick Henry Village. 
For further information, visit www.iba.
heidelberg.de/english .
Bahnstadt: A lively mix of housing, 
science and business
The new district of Bahnstadt has model 
character: it is the largest passive house 
settlement in the world. With a vibrant 
mix of housing, science and commerce, 
the district creates new spaces to work 
and live in. Ultimately, Bahnstadt will be 
home for around 6,800 people and pro-
vide jobs for 6,000, mainly in research 
and science-based companies.
With a total area of 116 hectares, the 
Bahnstadt is larger than the entire old 
town of Heidelberg and one of the 
largest urban development projects 
in Germany.
In addition to green and open spaces, 
streets and watercourses as well as 
kindergartens, an elementary school, a 
community center, a cinema and a local 
shopping center have been created. 
The new Europaplatz will connect the 
district with the central station. The 
new conference center is also being 
built here. For further information, visit 
www.heidelberg-bahnstadt.de/en .
The former US Army sites: A once-
in-a-lifetime opportunity
The withdrawal of the U.S. Army repre-
sents a unique opportunity for Heidel -
berg. 180 hectares are now free for new 
developments: for affordable housing, 
cultural and recreational offers, inno -
vative scientific institutions, attractive 
business premises and much more. 
There are five former US sites to be 
redeveloped: Mark-Twain Village  /
Campbell Barracks (43.3 hectares) in 
Südstadt, US Hospital (9.3 hectares) in 
Rohrbach as well as Patton Barracks 
(14.8 hectares), Patrick-Henry-Village 
(97.2 hectares) and the Airfield (15.6 
hectares) in Kirchheim.
The site in the southern part of the 
city is primarily used for affordable 
42 | Homes for everyone Homes for everyone  | 43
Future in a nutshell: the Heidelberg Innovation Parc (hip) on the premises of the former Patton Barracks. 
Patrick Henry Village (PHV) is to be further developed into a sustainable 16th district and become a 
model location for the use of digital technologies, innovative mobility concepts and climate-neutral 
energy supply. 

Embracing diversity  | 4544 | Embracing diversity
As a Rainbow City, Heidelberg is taking decisive steps to strengthen 
LGBTIQ+. Since 2016, the members of the “Sexual and Gender 
Diversity Round Table” have been advising the city administration. 
Around 15 local LGBTIQ+ initiatives contribute their expertise here 
in order to work out fundamental and current problems of LGBTIQ+ 
and to counteract exclusion and disadvantage through appropriate 
recommendations. With projects such as the Trans* Action Weeks 
Rhine-Neckar, the cities of Heidelberg and Mannheim offer a plat-
form to raise awareness and educate about trans* persons and the 
diversity of gender identities and their forms of expression. 
With the Intercultural Center, Heidelberg is creating a place for 
cultural participation that promotes cohesion in the city‘s society 
and the integration of people with a history of migration through 
various participation formats and an intercultural program. With the 
“Interreligious Dialogue”, the city facilitates a successful exchange 
of religions in Heidelberg. In order to ensure that the interests of 
foreign residents are also heard, the Migration Advisory Council 
has had an advisory function in the city council for more than 20 
years. Further information can be found at www.heidelberg.de/
integration.
 
The City of Heidelberg is intensively committed to the equal partici-
pation and self-determination of people with disabilities. This includes 
barrier-free communication as well as comprehensive counseling and 
care services, the “Wohnberatung” (housing counseling) as a 
specialist office for barrier-free planning, building, and living, or the 
improvement of mobility, for example through the wheelchair cab. 
The municipal representative for the disabled is the primary contact 
person for concerns of people with disabilities and their relatives 
and also advises the administration on matters of inclusion. Contact: 
behindertenbeauftragte@heidelberg.de, 06221 58-15590. Further 
information at www.heidelberg.de/inklusion. 
Embracing diversity
Heidelberg is diverse: people from 180 nations, 
with different gender and sexual identities, old and 
young, people with and without disabilities live here. 
With numerous offers, measures and projects, the 
city is working with many partners to ensure that all 
people here have the same opportunities and can 
feel at home in Heidelberg.  

Getting the public involved  | 4746 | Volunteers – a vital asset for Heidelberg
Heidelberg values its volunteers: with 
the Civic Engagement Coordination 
Office (Koordinierungsstelle Bürgeren-
gagement) as part of the mayor’s of -
fice, there is a central contact point for 
voluntary work in the city hall. Once a 
year, it awards the honorary plaque 
(Ehrenamtsmedaille) for outstanding 
civic commitment.
The volunteer agency  (Freiwilligen-  
Agentur) of the “Der PARITÄTISCHE” 
charity is an important municipal part -
ner and an important contact for citi -
zens who would like to get involved. 
An online database of volunteering 
opportunities can be found at www.
freiwilligenagentur-heidelberg.de .
The City of Heidelberg wants citizens to be 
involved from as early a stage as possible in 
decision-making on municipal projects, for 
example the redevelopment of the former 
US Army sites and the master plan for the 
Neuenheimer Feld area. To ensure the smooth 
running of this process, the city has drawn 
up “guidelines for public participation”  
(Leitlinien für mitgestaltende Bürgerbeteiligung) 
in consultation with the public. 
The people of Heidelberg also have access 
to a “planning list”  (Vorhabenliste) that is 
updated regularly with details of current and 
forthcoming municipal projects. As well as 
indicating the stage a project has reached, the 
list also includes information on project costs 
and names relevant contacts. In this way, it 
facilitates dialogue between the city and its 
residents form an early stage of a project. 
You can direct any questions you have about 
public participation in Heidelberg to the mu -
nicipal “coordination point” (Koordinierungss -
telle). For more information, visit www.heidel -
berg.de/involvement . 
Volunteers – a vital 
asset for Heidelberg
For more than 15 years, the city administration has 
been supporting voluntary work.  
Getting the 
public involved
Getting the public even more 
involved in municipal decision- 
making is very important to 
the City of Heidelberg. 
The Civic Engagement 
Coordination Office is 
happy to answer any 
questions about vol -
untary work in Heidel -
berg. Please visit www.
heidelberg.de/buerger- 
engagement for further 
information.

48 | Partners around the world
CAMBRIDGE 
MONTPELLIER  
BAUTZEN
REHOVOT
KUMAMOTO
HANGZHOU
SIMFEROPOL
PALO ALTO
Partners around the world
Heidelberg entertains partnerships with eight cities 
on three continents. 
Contribution towards international 
understanding
As an international city with almost 
12 million guests a year and about 
45,000 citizens with a migrant back -
ground, Heidelberg has eight partner-
ships: with Palo Alto in the US, with 
Hangzhou in China, with Montpellier 
in France, with Cambridge in Great 
Britain, Rehovot in Israel, Bautzen in 
Germany, Simferopol on the Crime -
an peninsula and with Kumamoto 
in Japan.
Palo Alto and Hangzhou are Heidel -
berg‘s youngest partner cities. Palo 
Alto in the US state of California is 
considered the “capital” of Silicon 
Valley. Hangzhou is the location of 
major scientific and educational in -
stitutions and is particularly strong 
in the high-tech fields of biomedicine, 
informatics and digital new media.
In addition, there are friendly relations 
with the cities of Mostar (Bosnia-Her-
zegovina), Jelenia Góra (Poland) and 
Heidelberg (South Africa/Gauteng 
Province).
Granting free entry* 
to the Kurpfälzisches Museum 
*valid for 2 adults and 2 children
Can be exchanged for a library card  
for the Public Library (Stadtbücherei)  
valid for 3 months
Voucher
Voucher

Discover the past
The unique collections at Kurpfälzisches Museum,  
from art, handicrafts and archaeological finds   
to fascinating insights into Heidelberg’s history, take  
visitors on a thrilling journey of discovery through  
the millennia. We look forward to your visit!
Reading, listening, watching
Free library card valid for 3 months 
At our library you will find: 230,000 books, more than 300 international magazines 
and newspapers, CDs and DVDs, superb premises, help and advice, 46 opening 
hours per week, a 24-hour digital library service, a mobile library, events, digital 
workstations, a library café, user information and parking area. 
Heidelberg Public Library
Poststraße 15
69115 Heidelberg
Phone 06221  58-36100 
stadtbuecherei@heidelberg.de
www.stadtbuecherei.heidelberg.de
Opening times
Tuesday to Friday 10.00 am – 8.00 pm 
Saturdays 10.00 am – 4.00 pm  
 
Nearest public transport
Stadtbücherei, Römerstraße
Kurpfälzisches Museum Heidelberg
Hauptstraße 97
69117 Heidelberg
Phone 06221 58-34020  
kurpfaelzischesmuseum@heidelberg.de
www.museum.heidelberg.de
Opening times
Tuesday to Sunday 10.00 am – 6.00 pm 
Mondays: Closed  
 
Nearest public transport
Universitätsplatz, Peterskirche
Imprint
City of Heidelberg
Marktplatz 10
69117 Heidelberg
Text 
Public Relations Office
Design 
City of Heidelberg, 
Brand Communication
Photos 
Tobias Dittmer: Cover and  
Pages 8, 28, 30, 34, 46
Julian Beekmann: Pages 3, 4, 6
Steffen Diemer: Pages 16, 18, 22, 41, 
50 (o.)
Tobias Schwerdt: Page 19 (u.)
DNA Collective: Page 21
Sven Ehlers / Stadtwerke HD: Page 23
Envato.com: Page 24
Philipp Rothe: Page 26
Christian Buck: Pages 32, 33, 42, 49 (u.)
Kinga Lubowiecka / EMBL: Page 36
Lukas Rübenacker: Page 38
Lukas Schütz / DLRG HD: Page 39
KCAP: Page 43
Uwe Anspach: Page 44
Gattner / KMH: Page 49 (o.) 
Copyright © 2020 City of Heidelberg.  
All right reserved. Reprints (including 
excerpts) only with the explicit per-
mission of the City of Heidelberg.
Edition
1st Edition, June 2022
Links
Heidelberg City Administration / 
City of Heidelberg website
www.heidelberg.de
Online ‘citizens’ service’
www.heidelberg.de/buergerservice  
Calendar of events
www.heidelberg.de/veranstaltungen
Heidelberg-App
www.meinheidelberg.de
City of Heidelberg on social media
www.facebook.de/heidelberg.de
www.twitter.com/heidelberg_de
www.instagram.com/heidelberg_de
www.youtube.com/StadtHeidelberg

City of Heidelberg
Marktplatz 10
69117 Heidelberg
Phone 06221 58-10580 
Fax 06221 58-10900 
stadt@heidelberg.de
www.heidelberg.de